## $Id: bioback.pod,v 1.3.14.1 2001-03-03 08:45:30 heikki Exp $

#
# Documentation about the backend of bioperl
# 
# This is for sysadmin/db admin on a new site to get a quick
# overview about how to build things on their system for bioperl
#

=head1 NAME

bioperl backend - how to customise bioperl for your site

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Not really appropiate for a synopsis. Read on

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document is designed to let you customise bioperl on
your site. Bioperl can work with a number of database formats
(at the moment, simple fasta flat file formats and EMBL/Swissprot
.dat format), allowing users to retrieve sequences from these
databases. In addition another layer, above flat file indexing
is provided, allowing sites to retrieve sequences from GenBank via
the web or via flat file indexing, or - if you have the time to 
do so, you can write your own interface to an in-house RDB. Using
DBI this should be quite simple.

Two scripts are provided to get you started with the bioperl backend:

=over 2

=item bpfetch 

Fetches sequences from a Database

=item bpindex

Builds indexes for flat files databases which are easily accessible
by bpfetch

=back

The core of the backend system is found in following modules

=over 2

=item Bio::DB::*

generic access to databases, whether flat file, web or rdb. At the
moment, this provides random access retrieval, on the basis of ids or
accession numbers, but does not provide the ability to loop over the
entire database, nor does it provide any complex querying ability.

Bio::DB::BioSeqI is the abstract interface (hence the I) for the
databases.  Bio::DB::GenBank and Bio::DB::GenPept are concrete
implementations for network access to the GenBank and GenPept
databases held at NCBI, using http as a protocol.

=item Bio::Index::*

flat file indexing system, for read-only, flat file distributions. These
provide for specific instances generic type access, but the underlying
machinery can be customised for any number of different flat file systems.

The Index modules EMBL and Fasta, as they are designed as Sequence databases
conform to the Bio::DB::BioSeqI interface, meaning they can be used whereever
the Bio::DB::BioSeqI is expected.

=item Bio::SeqIO::*

conversion systems for Bio::Seq objects, either to or from sequence
streams. The move of things into SeqIO prevents the Bio::Seq object
bloating up with format code, and the SeqIO system has the benefit
of being very easy to extend to new formats.

=back

=head1 SETTING UP BIOPERL INDICES

If you want to use the bioperl indexing of fasta and embl/swissprot
.dat files then the bpfetch and bpindex scripts are great ways to
start off (and also reading the scripts shows you how to use the
bioperl indexing stuff). bpfetch and bpindex coordinate by the use
of two environment variables

  BIOPERL_INDEX - directory where the indices are kept

  BIOPERL_INDEX_TYPE - type of DBM file to use for the index

The basic way of indexing a database, once BIOPERL_INDEX has been
set up, is to go

  bpindex <index-name> <filenames as full path>

eg, for Fasta files

  bpindex est /nfs/somewhere/fastafiles/est*.fa

Or, for embl/swissprot files
 
  bpindex -fmt=EMBL swiss /nfs/somewhere/swiss/swissprot.dat

To retrieve sequences from the index go

  bpfetch <index-name>:<id>

eg,

  bpfetch est:AA01234

or

  bpfetch swiss:VAV_HUMAN


bpfetch has other options to connect to genbank across the network.

=head1 CHECKLIST

   make a directory called /nfs/datadisk/bioperlindex/

   setenv BIOPERL_INDEX (or export in Bash) in the system login
   script to /nfs/datadisk/bioperlindex/

   go bpindex swissprot /nfs/datadisk/swiss/swissprot.dat
   etc

   You are ready to use bpfetch


