# POD documentation - main docs before the code

=head1 NAME

Bio::DB::Biblio::AlzforumQuery - Represents and Alzforum bibliographic query

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Bio::Biblio;
  use Bio::DB::Biblio::AlzforumQuery;
  my $query=new Bio::DB::Biblio::AlzforumQuery (-author=>'hockly, e',
                                                -phrase1=>'histone deacetylase inhibitor',
                                                -phrase2=>'environmental enrichment',
                                                -andOR=>'OR');
  my $biblio = new Bio::Biblio (-access => 'alzforum',
                                -query => $query);
  print "Number of publications satisfying query: ",$biblio->count,"\n";
  my @refs=$biblio->get_all;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a simple class that represents an Alzforum query. The allowed attributes are precisely the legal search fields and are as follows.

  phrase1
  phrase2
  andOr	         [AND or OR]
  author
  commentator
  journal
  PubDateLowMonth
  PubDateLowYear
  PubDateHighMonth
  PubDateHighYear
  commented      [1 or 0]
  ARFRec         [1 or 0]
  mileStone      [1 or 0]
  sort           [1 or 0]

These can be used with the given case or as all lowercase.

Note that author is always the first author of the paper.  Author
names are expressed as

  lastname, initials

The initials are optional.  The comma is MANDATORY if any initials are
present.

=head1 KNOWN BUGS AND CAVEATS

This is still a work in progress.  

=head2 Bugs, Caveats, and ToDos

  TBD

=head1 AUTHOR - Nat Goodman

Email natg@shore.net

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2003 Institute for Systems Biology (ISB). All Rights Reserved.

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 APPENDIX

The rest of the documentation describes the methods.

=head2 Constructor

 Title   : new
 Usage   : my $query=new Bio::DB::Biblio::AlzforumQuery 
                         (-author=>'hockly, e',
                          -phrase1=>'histone deacetylase inhibitor',
                          -phrase2=>'environmental enrichment',
                          -andOR=>'OR');
 Function: Create query object
 Returns : New query object

 Usage   : $query=new Bio::Biblio(-access=>'alzforum',
                                  -query=>'goodman n [au] labbase [tiab]');
 Function: Create session object and run query
 Returns : New query object

=head2 as_string

 Title   : as_string
 Usage   : print $query->as_string;
 Function: Produce string form of query for incorporation into URL.
           Note that the result is NOT URI-escaped -- the calling
           program has to take care of this
 Returns : String

 Notes   : the string operator ("") is overloaded to do this

=cut
