# POD documentation - main docs before the code

=head1 NAME

Bio::Biblio::IO::ncbi_elink - NCBI Linkout information for one citation

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Objects of this type are returned by the Bio::Biblio::IO::ncbi_eutils
format module.

  use Bio::Biblio::IO;
  my $biblio = new Bio::Biblio::IO (-data_source => 'ncbi_eutils',
				    -what => 'links',
                                    -query => 'goodman n [au] labbase [tiab]');
  my $linkout = $biblio->get_next;
  print "PubMed ID: ", $linkout->Id;
  print " Full text URL: ", $linkout->Url, "\n";

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class represents NCBI Linkout information obtained via NCBI's
eutilities for one citation. The Bio::Biblio::IO::ncbi_eutils format
module returns objects of this type.

The basic structure mimics NCBI's elink format. The class defines an
accessor method for each NCBI tag that we pass through. In addition, a
few convenience methods are also defined.

In most cases, a citation has at most one linkout, and it provides a
url for getting the article's full-text. The convenience methods are
designed to make this case easy.

=head1 KNOWN BUGS AND CAVEATS

This is still a work in progress.  

=head2 Bugs, Caveats, and ToDos

  TBD

=head1 AUTHOR - Nat Goodman

Email natg@shore.net

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2003 Institute for Systems Biology (ISB). All Rights Reserved.

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=head1 APPENDIX

The rest of the documentation describes the methods.

=head2 new 

 Title   : new
 Usage   : my $linkout=new Bio::Biblio::IO::ncbi_elink ($ncbi_elink)
 Function: Create object
 Returns : New object
 Args    : one ncbi elink record
 Notes   : Inherited from Root -- users should never need to call this

=head2 HasFullText, has_full_text

 Title   : HasFullText, has_full_text
 Usage   : if ($linkout->HasFullTest) {
             # process full-text link
           }
 Function: tests whether object has link to full-text
 Returns : true value if object has link to full-text, else false

=head2 Simple attributes

These are methods for getting values from the object.  All of these
should be read-only (more precisely, should only be written by code
internal to the object), but this is not enforced. We assume,
Perl-style, that programmers will behave nicely and not complain too
loudly if the software lets them do something stupid.

Methods have the same name as the attribute.  To get the value of
attribute xxx, just say $xxx=$object->xxx

 Attr    : Id, id
 Function: PubMed ID of entry

 Attr    : Url, full_text
 Function: Url linking to full-text of article

 Attr    : SubjectType, subject_type
 Function: Subject type for link pointing to full-text.
           Always 'publishers/providers' -- provided for consistency

 Attr    : Provider, provider
 Function: Provider for full-text of article
           HASH ref of Name, NameAbbr, Id, Url, IconUrl

 Attr    : ProviderName, provider_name
 Attr    : ProviderNameAbbr, provider_abbr
 Attr    : ProviderId, provider_id
 Attr    : ProviderUrl, provider_url
 Attr    : ProviderIconUrl, provider_icon
 Function: Convenience methods to access fields of Provider

 Attr    : ObjUrl, links
 Function: ARRAY ref of links
           Each link is a HASH ref of Url, SubjectType, Provider, Attribute
           Only needed by users who wish to process entire list of links

=cut
